new blog post for review (#3)
FredaXin/blog_posts: creating_functions_for_EDA.md

# Creating Python Functions for Exploratory Data Analysis and Data Cleaning

Exploratory Data Analysis and Data Cleaning are two essential steps before
we start to develop Machine Learning Models, and they can be quite
time-consuming, especially for people who are still familiarizing themselves
with this whole process. 

> EDA and Data Cleaning is rarely an one-time linear process; you might find

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EDA and Data Cleaning is rarely a one-time, linear process: you might find
```

> yourself going back to earlier sections and modify the way you treat the dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
yourself going back to earlier sections and modifying the way you treat the dataset
```

> quite often. One way to speed up this process is to recycle some of your code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quite often. One way to speed up this process is to recycle some of the code
```

> if you find yourself use them over and over again.This is why we should create

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you find yourself using over and over again. This is why we should create
```

functions to automate the repetitive parts of EDA and Data Cleaning. Another
benefit of using functions in the EDA and Data Cleaning is to eliminate the

> variances of results caused by the differences in coding. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
inconsistency of results caused by accidental differences in the code. 
```

In this blog post, I will walk you through a few useful python functions that I

> created for EDA and Data Cleaning. The library contains all these functions can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
created for EDA and Data Cleaning. The library containing all these functions can
```

> be forked in the [link](https://github.com/FredaXin/eda_and_beyond/blob/master/eda_and_beyond.py).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be cloned from my repository [`eda_and_beyond`](https://github.com/FredaXin/eda_and_beyond/blob/master/eda_and_beyond.py).
```

> Special thanks to all the people who contributed to this small (but growing) library. 

Reviewer: Should you name the people, and maybe link to a social media account for them?

___ 

## Functions for Handling Missing Values

> One important step in the EDA is to inspect missing values, study if there is any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One important step in the EDA is to inspect missing values, study if there are any
```

patterns in the missing values, and make a decision about how to deal with them
accordingly. 

> The first function here is to give you a general ideal of the total and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first function here is to give you a general idea of the total and
```

    Checks nulls
    '''
    if df.isnull().sum().sum() > 0:
        mask_total = df.isnull().sum().sort_values(ascending=False) 
        total = mask_total[mask_total > 0]

        mask_percent = df.isnull().mean().sort_values(ascending=False) 
        percent = mask_percent[mask_percent > 0] 

        missing_data = pd.concat([total, percent], axis=1, keys=['Total', 'Percent'])
    
        print(f'Total and Percentage of NaN:\n {missing_data}')
    else: 
        print('No NaN found.')
```

After the initial inspection, you can decide if you want to have a closer
inspection on those columns with excessive missing values. With specification of the
threshold of the missing value percentage, the following
function will give you a list of columns that have missing values over that
threshold:

```
def view_columns_w_many_nans(df, missing_percent):
    '''
    Checks which columns have over specified percentage of missing values
    Takes df, missing percentage
    Returns columns as a list
    '''
    mask_percent = df.isnull().mean()
    series = mask_percent[mask_percent > missing_percent]
    columns = series.index.to_list()
    print(columns) 
    return columns
```

> There are many ways to deal with missing values. If you decide to drop the

Reviewer: ```suggestion

There are many ways to deal with missing values. If you decide to drop the
```

> columns with too many missing values (over certain threshold of which you specify), this function can help to achieve this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
columns with too many missing values (over a certain threshold you specify), you can use this function
to accomplish the task:
```

> task:

Reviewer: Also here

```suggestion

```

```
def drop_columns_w_many_nans(df, missing_percent):
    '''
    Takes df, missing percentage(default=.9)
    Drops the columns whose missing value is bigger than missing percentage
    Returns df
    '''
    series = view_columns_w_many_nans(df, missing_percent=missing_percent)
    list_of_cols = series.index.to_list()
    df.drop(columns=list_of_cols)
    print(list_of_cols)
    return df
```

> However, there are many downsides of deleting missing values from your dataset,

Reviewer: ```suggestion

However, there are many downsides of deleting missing values from your dataset,
```

> such as reduced statistical power. If you decide to impute the missing value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as reduced statistical power. If you decide to impute the missing values
```

instead, check out Sklearn's
[`SimpleImputer`](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.impute.SimpleImputer.html)
module,
which is an easy-to-use tool to impute missing values whichever way strikes

> yours fancy. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your fancy. 
```

In addition, if you'd like to read more about how to deal with missing values, check out this
helpful [slide](https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/prc/_files/cs/Missing-Data.pdf)
created by Melissa Humphries at Population Research Center. 

---
## Functions for Data Visualization

> Human brain is very good at identify patterns, and this is why visualizing your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The human brain is very good at identify patterns, and this is why visualizing your
```

> dataset during the EDA process and identify the patterns can be very beneficial. For instance, histogram

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dataset during the EDA process and identifying the patterns can be very beneficial. For instance, histograms
```

> makes analyzing the distribution of the data an easier task; Boxplot is great for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make analyzing the distribution of the data an easier task; Boxplot is great for
```

> identify outliers; Scatter plot is very useful when it comes to checking the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
identifying outliers; Scatter plot is very useful when it comes to checking the
```

correlations between two variables. [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/) and [Seaborn](https://seaborn.pydata.org/) are your best friends
when it comes to data visualization. However, creating individual plot(s) for
each features can become tedious if you have a large number of features. In this
section, I will walk you through a few functions for creating group plots that can help you to
kill many birds with one function. 

We often want to look at the distributions of columns with numerical values.

> The following function will create a group plot for all numerical columns in your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following function will create a group of plots for all numerical columns in your
```

> dataset. This function is adapted from Dominik Gawlik's [blog

Reviewer: It looks like this is a parenthetical remark, so suggesting it be wrapped as such

```suggestion
dataset. (This function is adapted from Dominik Gawlik's [blog
```

post](https://www.kaggle.com/dgawlik/house-prices-eda#Categorical-data), which
is a great read

> for the entire EDA process with real dataset:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the entire EDA process with a real dataset):

```

```
def histograms_numeric_columns(df, numerical_columns):
    '''
    Takes df, numerical columns as list

>     Returns group histagrams

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns a group of histagrams
```

    '''
    f = pd.melt(df, value_vars=numerical_columns) 
    g = sns.FacetGrid(f, col='variable',  col_wrap=4, sharex=False, sharey=False)
    g = g.map(sns.distplot, 'value')
    return g
```
Here is what the output looks like: 
![image](./creating_funcitons_for_EDA/histogram.png)

> Another helpful visualization tool is heatmap. Heatmap comes very handy what you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another helpful visualization tool is a heatmap. Heatmaps come in very handy when you
```

want to check the correlation between your dependent and independent variables.

> Oftentimes, heatmap can be visually cluttered if you have too many

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oftentimes, heatmaps can be visually cluttered if you have too many
```

features. One way to avoid it is to create a heatmap just for the dependent

> variable(target) and independent variables(features). The following function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
variable (target) and independent variables (features). The following function
```

will assist you with this task: 

```
def heatmap_numeric_w_dependent_variable(df, dependent_variable):
    '''
    Takes df, a dependant variable as str

>     Returns a heatmap of independent variables' correlations with dependent variable 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Returns a heatmap of all independent variables' correlations with dependent variable 
```

    '''
    plt.figure(figsize=(8, 10))
    g = sns.heatmap(df.corr()[[dependent_variable]].sort_values(by=dependent_variable), 
                    annot=True, 
                    cmap='coolwarm', 
                    vmin=-1,
                    vmax=1) 
    return g
```
As you can see in the output, the correlations becomes easier to read since the
values are sorted: 

![image](./creating_funcitons_for_EDA/heatmap.png)

---
## Functions for Changing Data Types

Ensuring your features are of the correct datatypes is another important step
during the EDA and Data Cleaning process. It happens quite often that Pandas'
`.read_csv()` method would interpret datatypes differently than the original
data file. Reading the data dictionary is very illuminating during this step.
Additionally, if you are planning to do some feature engineering, changing data
types is required. The following two functions work hand in hand to transform

> categorical features into numerical (ordinal): 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
categorical features into numerical (ordinal) features: 
```

The first function is to output a function, i.e. a transformer, that

> will transform each `str` in a list into a `int`, whereas the `int` is the index of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will transform each `str` in a list into a `int`, where the `int` is the index of
```

> that element in the list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that element in the list.

```

```
def categorical_to_ordinal_transformer(categories):
    '''
    Returns a function that will map categories to ordinal values based on the
    order of the list of `categories` given. Ex.

    If categories is ['A', 'B', 'C'] then the transformer will map 
    'A' -> 0, 'B' -> 1, 'C' -> 2.
    '''
    return lambda categorical_value: categories.index(categorical_value)

```

> The second function has two parts: first, it takes a dictionary in

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The second function has two parts: first, it takes a dictionary of
```

> the form as follows: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the following form: 
```

```
categorical_numerical_mapping = {'Utilities': ['ELO', 'NoSeWa', 'NoSewr', 'AllPub'],
                                 'Exter Qual': ['Po', 'Fa', 'TA', 'Gd', 'Ex'],
                                 'Exter Cond': ['Po', 'Fa', 'TA', 'Gd', 'Ex']}
```
Using the previous function we define earlier, it turns the dictionary into this:

```

> transformers = {'Utilities': [0, 1, 2, 3],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transformers = {'Utilities': <utilties_transformer>,
```

>                 'Exter Qual': [0, 1, 2, 3, 4],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                'Exter Qual': <exter_qual_transformer>,
```

>                 'Exter Cond': [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                'Exter Cond': <exter_cond_transfomer>}
```

```

> The second part of the function is to use the `.map()` method to map this newly

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The second part of the function uses the `.map()` method to map each transformer function
```

> created function onto the dataframe. Note that a copy of the original

Reviewer: ```suggestion
onto the dataframe. Note that a copy of the original
```

dataframe will be created during this function. 

```
def transform_categorical_to_numercial(df, categorical_numerical_mapping):
    '''
    Transforms categorical columns to numerical columns
    Takes a df, a dictionary 
    Returns df
    '''
    transformers = {k: categorical_to_ordinal_transformer(v) 
                    for k, v in categorical_numerical_mapping.items()}
    new_df = df.copy()
    for col, transformer in transformers.items():
        new_df[col] = new_df[col].map(transformer).astype('int64')
    return new_df
```

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion

---

```
